Morning, David. If you can turn your camera on and your mic on.
We've got 10 minutes-
Yes
... with you this morning, including any time for questions. Over to you.
All right. Thank you.
Thank you for the opportunity to talk to the committee on our
submission. So NTVPA, we represent about 2,000
payroll practitioners throughout the country.
I want to cover off a little bit more on each of the kind of four main points that
we made in our submission. Our first one was about making payroll
providers in New Zealand compliant and accountable for the
software that they're providing.
At the present time, there are payroll systems that should not be used in the New
Zealand environment, and they can get away with this because there's no
legislation, there's no certification,
there's no IRD or MBIE checks on any
software, and from our side, we see
issues with this all the time.
So this is one of the things we would like to see built into the act.
It was actually in the process of the prior
review of the Holidays Act, but in the
consultative process, the targeted consultative process that happened October
last year, it was written out, and it was clearly stated that it would not be
covered, and it's not followed through into the bill, so it's been
totally removed from the bill.
And this is a major issue because
simplifying payroll software will
not solve the problem. That's a big misconception from
non-payroll people. Software is written in many different ways,
and
that's impacting on how businesses use the payroll software, and there's no
protection, especially for small business, if they've got, especially
overseas payroll software that's non-compliant for the New Zealand environment.
So we're very concerned that it's not in there.
So at the present time, an employer can be taken to task by labor
inspectorate, an improvement notice, enforceable undertaking, whole range of
steps can be taken. We would like to see the same framework applied to
payroll providers, so if there's an issue of a payroll system, they're asked to
provide evidence to show that they're compliant.
If they're not, an improvement notice can be put on them.
If they don't act on that, an enforceable undertaking is put on them.
So all the things that you would normally do for an employer, you could actually do
for a payroll provider.
Now, when MBIE or a labor inspector is talking to an employer, they're talking to
one employer.
When you're talking about a payroll system, you're talking about a whole industry.
You're talking about hundreds if not thousands of employers that are using that
software, and that's why it's important that the software is
compliant. So that's why it's not just about
one situation, it's talking about software that's used across a whole industry,
and this is why it's important. I really like the idea of name and shame.
You've got banning orders for immigration and bad employers.
By just threatening name and shame, a lot of these payroll providers that
are not compliant would act because they do not want to be put on a
list. They do not want to be out there to be shown that they're non-compliant,
because it's about selling software, and that's a really good way to
quickly get all these payroll systems on track.
But we do need certification, and we do need checks from IR and
MBIE on these systems. They are causing major problems.
So yes, it's legislation. Yes, it's how it's managed, but it's also the software
itself and choices made by payroll providers.
There are payroll providers out there that are saying, "Oh, we don't do this
calculation. We don't need it."
And then because small businesses are not payroll experts,
they see what's on the website that say it's fully compliant with the Holidays Act,
and they buy the software thinking it's all been checked by IR, that's another
misconception, and then they get hooked in and they've spent all
this money, and then they find out the software they're using is incorrect.
So that is a major issue, and that's one part of our submission.
Next one is about, we need a payroll specification document for
any new act. This is more payroll technical,
but we had one when we had the partner labor, when MBIE, the
super ministry was formed. They said, "No, not interested.
Go seek independent advice." And that's what's caused a lot of the mess in the
Holidays Act, is because we've had no real leadership from MBIE.
They duck and dive quite quickly. Any question, it's quite vague.
So we need a payroll specification document written for
payroll that will support payroll providers to provide compliant software,
and that's not what we've got at the moment, and we need it for the new act, and
it's got to be for all stakeholders. We do auditing.
We do technical training. We base everything on a payroll spec.
All right? So we get you the correct information on how a payroll system runs.
That must be part of any new act, and it must be out
before the two-year implementation process, so we can actually build a new
system, not at the other end.
Point three was about remuneration.
That's really good. We fully support any type of process you put into a new act to
fix the problems that we've got now, so we can move forward.
We don't want to be dragged back in the last six years trying to do recalculations,
but there's a real problem that we're seeing right now.
So you're saying there's a potential process in the new act
that employers will be able to use to fix the problems of the past.
We're seeing employers right now making decisions to say, "Oh, we're not going to
do anything now. We know there's problems now.
We'll just wait two years or when the act's actually implemented, and then we'll
use your new process to basically fix the problems." So that
means employees will not be paid, not have their leave
fixed until the new act is implemented in years to come,
and that is wrongSo it's sending the wrong message.
The labor inspectorate needs to send a clear message to all employers,
if they've got a problem now, it must be fixed now, and if it's found
that they didn't act on it when the new act's in place and they're asking for this
new remuneration process to be used,
that will not be
accommodated. And that means potentially a whole range of extra
legislative requirements are put onto that employer, because that is basically
wrong, where an employee should have been paid correctly right now.
Thank you.
There's a big section of our submission, and we honestly ran out of time,
about issues, and we just had to put it in bullet form.
I would probably need another month to write up and put the detail behind it.
This act is, or the bill is actually kind of replacing the
overly complex act we've got now with another set of
rules, calculations, and tests, which will create
another set of complexity. And a lot of it,
it's written for software, but it's not written for end-to-end payroll
processing. That's operational payroll, and there's going to be a lot of
stops and starts when you're trying to process pay.
If I process pay on a Monday, I've got to get that money in the bank by the end of
the day. Some of the ways, this, how the act works, it's sort of like
saying, "I've got to stop. I've got to go and ask a few people.
I've got to do a few things, got to do a few tests." That doesn't work in
operational payroll. So it hasn't really been thought out in
that regard.
So there are problems, and I see it's going to step or create a new set of
problems for payroll going forward.
I say devil in the detail. There's a lot of detail missing from this bill that
payroll would need to feel if it's
workable. And there's a lot missing.
And I'm kind of scared that over the two-year implementation process, that's when
the detail will come. Well, that's when we're building systems, and we can't
keep rebuilding the system from scratch as new things come
up. So a lot of the detail needs to be up front when
the act is actually passed, and that's
one of the issues that we have in regards to how this
act's going to be implemented over a two-year period.
I've kind of pushed it through because I don't know about the 10 minutes for any
questions. So
over to
Evan.
Thanks so much, David. Is there any questions,
Phil or Grant?
No, that was extremely interesting and different
from so many of the submissions we've had, so very helpful. Thanks, David.
Yeah.
Thanks, Grant.
So David, just on the point around a document that comes with the specifications,
that wouldn't be defined though in the act.
Your expectation is that just happens as part of the
implementation of it, or are you expecting that there's
a reference to the requirement for that specifications list in the act?
So at the present time, IR, sorry, I've just come up from the flu.
IR has a specification document that they release for the
1st of April changes.
Yeah.
And that's not part of legislation, but all the legislation feeds into that
document.
Yes.
We need some sort of guarantee, some sort of
ongoing support from MB that, one, the document's going to
be created-
Okay
... and then it's going to have ongoing support as case law, as
other things change, it's updated.
So that means you've got a base document that all payroll providers,
all auditors, anyone can actually go to say, "This is how the
payroll system needs to be built."
So it's an implementation commitment, not a legislative reference,
but take the point. Thank you. Hey, look, really good submission.
Thank you for taking the time to join us this morning.
Members, we are now going to move to our second
submission from The Farm Office Limited.
Good morning. We've got 10 minutes with you this morning, including any time for
submissions, so I'll hand straight over to you.
Hello. So my name is Evelyn Bass. I'm actually a
member of the NZPPA.
So I'm a payroll provider, an outsourced payroll
provider.
I do payroll for farms, gyms, cafes,
and liquor stores,
and
I currently have major problems implementing the Holiday
Act because of the flexible and
varied working arrangements, and
this,
the new Employee Leave Act is basically,
idea is to replace the Holiday Act, makes it less complicated, makes it fair
simple,
and the principle of accruing leave for every hour worked
is great. And then all the limitations
and accepting exceptions surrounding
this by
basically
linking it to agreed hours and rosters and
notional rosters, then create, in my view,
unnecessary complexity for flexible work.
And flexible work is increasing, not decreasing,
and creates unfairness to employees
because they force employees
to create limitations in employment agreements that would
then give employees less leave
than they think they should have.
Because if you accrue leave based solely on hours worked,
it's clear, it's easy, it's fair for both the employers and the
employees. It will give an employee time off based
on the time they actually work,
and they get more leave as they work more.
So if somebody is contracted to work 40 hours a week but
always works 50-They will actually
get 50
hours worth of leave for every week of leave that they take, which means they
get the pay they expect, and they get the leave they expect.
But with these limitations where your agreed
hours are 40, but you work 50, you
create a complexity in the payroll
that makes the payroll very difficult for anyone who's
got employees that really work in a flexible way.
Because
on a farm,
one week they work seven days a week, the next week they
only work four days a week,
and their rosters go over three or four weeks.
They vary it during the season. And there's a lot of
people on farms that actually work as and when they
can. So these are people that are hard to
employ because they've got other commitments.
So they work if and when they can, but they are permanent
employees. But if I try to apply the rules in the
current act to those employees,
it would be impossible.
The only way I can see to apply these rules to employees like
that is that the employer and the employee would
agree every Sunday before payday as to what their agreed
hours are,
and then communicate that to payroll, and payroll will then apply
that to payroll they
process. Otherwise, I cannot see any way to apply the
rules.
Because the roster changes, because yes, of course, there is a roster,
and then people have day off. They have employment leave, bereavement
leave, sick leave, whatever, and the roster changes for
everybody in the business.
And so it basically makes it impossible to say these
are agreed hours because we can't put agreed hours in the
employment agreement.
You have a roster, but the roster changes.
So how
are you going to say these are additional hours, or these are not additional
hours? I simply can't
see a way to make it work, unless the employers
incredibly severely change the way they work.
And the way it would work would be unfair to the employees because
what the employer would do is put agreed hours in employment
agreement, which are the least hours an employee might be expected
to work in a week.
So you might say you work 15 hours a week, but there might
be weeks where they work 50,
but they would only get leave based on the 15 hours.
And I don't think employees would be happy if they only got
15 hours of leave. They have got the compensation of
the leave payment for the other hours, but it doesn't give them
leave, and it doesn't give them a fair payment when they are
on leave.
So that's my main point, that the principle is
great, but the limitations to link it back
to agreed hours
creates a huge problem for any truly flexible work.
Okay. Thank you.
Mm.
Any questions?
So Evelyn, is your view that it would create an
incentive for employers to
scale down
the number of agreed committed hours, and that would have the effect
of casualizing more employment?
Well, basically, these are people that have a permanent job-
Mm
... with flexible hours.
Yeah.
So there are no agreed hours in the current employment agreement at
all.
Mm.
But if you force people to create agreed
hours, then what they would do is put the lowest amount of
hours that people work-
Yep
... as agreed hours, because you don't want to pay people for hours they
don't work.
Mm-hmm.
But that's not fair to the employee.
Mm.
But you don't give the employer much choice than
doing that.
Mm.
And I can give you another example.
I do
payroll for a dairy farm where the son works on the dairy farm,
and the rest of the dairy farm is staffed by students.
They're close to Lincoln University.
So everybody gets paid per hour. They get the living
wage.
Mm.
But their roster changes based on when people can
work every single week.
Mm.
Nobody's got agreed hours in their agreement.
And
basically,
once this act comes in, in the way it is now,
those people will either have to sit down with every employee
every week to then agree on the hours they already worked
to then be able to do the payroll.
Mm.
Or these people would completely have to change the way they run their
farm and fire their student employees.
Mm.
I don't think that's the intended
way the law is supposed to work.
Mm.
So
I just tried to apply the
proposed law to all these situations, and I can't.
Yeah.
It's not possible.
You can't do it.
Yeah.
It's not workable.
Mm.
And to me, it's kind of going against the whole spirit
of the law and the change of the law because-
Mm
... work is becoming more flexible.
People do want more flexibility in their life. They do want to work from home.
They do want to work when they want to work.
And yet, by building this relation
with agreed hours into the law, you basically
recreate the problems that there were with the Holidays Act.
Yeah.
Where anyone who doesn't work regular
hours-gets punished in a way that
you can't find. In the Holidays Act, you couldn't define a week
and you couldn't define a day.
Mm.
In the current law, you can't define agreed hours and additional
hours. I mean, different words, but in
essence, the same problem.
Thank you.
That's really helpful.
Thank you, Evelyn. In your submission, you make the point that
you don't think it's appropriate that
leave is accrued while on parental leave.
Just wanting to confirm that you understand that this bill
removes that provision. Am I understanding your comment correctly?
No. The new bill basically pays people for
accruing leave, paid leave, while they're on parental leave.
But to me, that is a minor point, because I don't deal with that very
often. But the point I'm making now, I deal with it
every single week,
and it's going to make my work impossible in to the sense that
if the
law passes as it is right now, I may seriously
reconsider my career choice by the time it comes in.
Okay.
Grant, quick final question.
Yeah, just very quick. So, I take your point, what you're saying.
But just in terms of the casualization and so forth, I'd
imagine students, most of them, would be quite happy just to
receive the money,
extra money in terms of their holiday pay, as opposed to
necessarily worrying about accrued leave because of the nature of what students
they are in that casualization.
So all these people actually choose to accrue leave instead of
having it paid out.
So, no.
Okay. That's interesting.
I mean, you might think so, but the answer to that currently is no.
Yes, I understand. Thank you.
Okay.
Appreciate that.
Thanks very much, Evelyn. That's all we have time for.
Appreciate you taking the time to submit to us this morning.
We're now moving to the submission from Leave It To
Me Limited. So if we can invite
Sandy to the...
You've frozen.
Can you hear me?
Yeah.
Just froze for a moment.
I might be now unmuted. Hello.
If you could turn your video on, please, so we can see you, that'd be
appreciated.
Yes, I'm just trying to look for where this is. There we go.
Great. We've got 10 minutes with you this morning, including any time for
questions.
Yes. Thank you.
So if you could introduce-
Okay. My name's Sandy Price. I'm a business consultant and
I've got Anne with me. She does a lot of our payroll.
So I run a retail business and we also have worked with quite a wide range of
clients for payroll, as well as a whole lot of other things.
We share a lot of concerns with your previous panelist, so I won't repeat them
because I think she's made some incredibly valuable points.
The main thing is the issue of a lot of people who
start out on casual, and particularly in hospitality, eventually morph
into permanent staff who should be
allowed to accrue leave because the issue is one of how you
actually take your leave, that you actually do get holidays, that is the entire
point, as well as being paid fairly for those holidays.
So people who've gone from being casual with 8% paid then going
on to accruing leave, at the moment, they lose out because of the changes at the
year-end. I think the idea of accruing based on the hours
and
financial value is definitely worthwhile, and it
almost leads to a separate employment category,
because there are a lot of people who do have flexible work for the reasons
outlined by your previous commentator.
Those people might have medical issues. They've got children.
They've got other commitments. They've got multiple jobs.
And they're happy, excuse me, to work in that industry.
But that industry does come with a huge amount of variability in
hours available through seasons and through things
like events.
So,
being able to actually take three out of the four weeks of paid leave
requires us to be able to calculate what actually is
an appropriate time period, often taken in the low season
when the hours are less, but they will have accrued holiday pay at a
higher rate.
So I think it's important for any changes to reflect the fact that you're accruing
leave based on time as well as value.
But when you take your leave, the intention is for people to have effectively
three weeks of paid holiday, plus they can take another week of paid.
And a lot of people that we deal with would prefer to be paid.
When they change that employment type, it actually requires them to
take a pay cut. You're going from 8% pay as you go to
accruing leave, and then they lose 8%.
So being able to accrue it at a point where they will receive that
8% guaranteed at a later date is really important.
The other thing that doesn't seem to have come up, I haven't read all of the
details, but a lot of people are paid in a variety of ways.
You've also got allowances like shift allowances.
You've got overtime. You've got steps that are worked at time and a half.
You've got commission that's payable.
Sometimes this is on top of a minimum wage arrangement, and
sometimes it's in lieu of. You've also got people who get paid bonuses, and it's
not always clear in the employment contract if those bonuses should be attracting
holiday pay. And then you've got others on a piece rate.
So your accrual of paid value has a whole
lot of factors to it. Your accrual of time
is important in terms of taking that leave, so it needs to be taken as
a week,
or an equivalent to a week, because the whole point is that everybody gets four
weeks of leave and supposedly two weeks of sick leave.
So how do you make sure that they actually get their entitlement in time as well
as value? Because you're accruing it on a different basis if you have a
variable workload. So I think perhaps one
solutionWould be a hybrid
employment type because it is a growing thing.
It doesn't mean that employers are taking advantage of employees, because it is
usually of mutual benefit to have a negotiated
roster. So if you're able to accrue leave on the basis
of 8%, as long as you can take your leave,
particularly those who work nearly full-time.
If you're part-time, you're quite happy often to receive the money instead of the
time. But if you're a full-time person, you still need to be able to take that time
for rest and recuperation. So it's really important to be able to work out what
that equivalency is. So that's my main point about the
holidays. The second one is about sick leave.
I do believe it was an oversight in the previous act to allow for
10 days of sick leave. There are a lot of people who have extremely variable
patterns, a lot of part-timers.
You have the situation where someone who works one 10-hour day per
week, for example, who can get 10 weeks of sick leave, and that to me is a
bit of a nonsense. It then makes it an incentive for an
employer to have that person working five 2-hour days in order
for them to get 2 weeks of sick leave, and that creates a whole lot of other
issues. So I think the importance with the sick leave is it does need to be
proportional, and it does need to come back to a two-week equivalent,
not in a set number of days. So there are definitely some challenges.
The software companies have risen to the occasion in many cases, but
most of them don't allow for accurate recording of the
actual days worked or of the roster at the point that it was set.
And that would probably need to change.
We also find that we have to enter into a lot of discussions with employers
about the otherwise working day. For example, someone with a casual
work pattern,
the only time you really know that they're sick is if they were scheduled to work
and didn't. And the other part is with stat days, if they
were not rostered to work a stat day.
But had that been a normal week, it's really obvious from
the pattern that that would have been a stat day and they are eligible.
So that leads to a lot of discussions about the otherwise working day, and I
think that is something that's important to keep, because there is
currently a method of calculation and a recommended
system that will pass if you were audited by
the labor department or whatever the current equivalent is, if you were
getting it wrong. So it is important that employers and
payroll people and employees do have a system that
they can use to calculate those things.
Just one last thing is about the accrual of
parental leave.
I don't see how you can accrue time and value if you're not
actually at work. You may accrue time off, which might be
important if you're a new parent, but if you haven't worked for six months, for
example, then you're not necessarily accruing any actual paid
leave. So how would that work? I think it is a bit of a
nonsense. But you do need to be mindful of the time as well as the
value. The other thing which I'm
particularly concerned about is the idea that casual staff should
get 12.5% of
their
rate of pay from the day that they are employed.
That's on the basis that they would receive their sick pay bundled in
with 8% holidays. That's assuming that they're sick.
Most people don't take any of their sick leave, and yet this
proposal is to pay them for it in advance, and that is actually completely
inappropriate. I think people can accrue leave, but
new employees who are a new factor for a lot of employers,
there's no trust, there's no knowledge in having people able to take all
types of leave from day one, I think is a disincentive for
employers to take on people who potentially might be a risk
to them. So I think it will lead to some unintended consequences in terms
of employer behavior. Thank you. I think that's all I've got.
Thanks very much. We've got time for a couple of quick questions, members.
Anyone got a question?
No.
Sandy, thank you so much for
your presentation this morning and submission. I really appreciate it.
We are going to move on to our next submitter now.
Thank you.
Where we're going to invite,
Annick
to
the virtual seat.
Annick, if you'd like to-
Yes
... kick around-
I'm trying to find a video in here.
Oh, no worry. We'll give you a moment.
Sorry. Here we are.
Oh.
Is that on?
Yes, it looks like it's coming on. There we go.
Oh, excellent.
Good. Great.
Thank you.
Good morning. We've got five minutes with you this morning.
So, that includes any time for questions. Over to you.
Thank you. Thank you for
giving me the opportunity to speak.
My name is Annick Masselo, and I'm a professor of law at the University of
Canterbury. I have extensive experience in employment law,
and in the area of gender equality
both in
New Zealand and in Europe.
I wish to raise concerns. So in
contrast to the previous speakers, I wish to raise concern
on the idea of having a pro rata
calculation of sick leave under the Employment Leave
Bill. It's likely to disproportionately impact women,
and by extension, children and other
dependents.
Evidence from New Zealand Ministry for Women shows that
women in Aotearoa, New Zealand, continue to take care of
most of the family's responsibility, and women are more
likely to have primary care for
the unpaid care, and family responsibility.
So, they do take care of children, elderly,
people with disabilityAnd this responsibility
directly affect their ability to participate fully in the
education training and the labor market.
This is reflected by employment pattern.
Data from Statistic New Zealand indicates that about
30% of women work part-time compared to about just
12% of
men.
But
what we see is that those are not choices that are
made individually, but they're shaped by
structural factors, which includes high cost of
childcare in New Zealand, which is one of the most
unaffordable in the OECD country.
In this context, it is important to note that New Zealand does not
have a specific entitlement to care leave, and
that's really in contrast to many other countries.
Sick leave serves a double purpose.
It serves the purpose of taking care of the person who is sick, the
individual who is sick, but also to the employee, but also
for the employee to look after dependents.
And because women are more likely to carry the caregiving,
they're also more likely to need more of the leave.
But because of the pro rata, they will be entitled to
less leave, but will still require more
leave.
So the pro rata system compounds inequalities.
Women,
it creates structural disadvantage.
Those with the greater care responsibility will receive the least
access to leave.
In effect, the bill risk penalizing care work, which we know is
essential for families, communities, and the economy at large.
And without a separate entitlement for care leave, the burden
falls disproportionately on women.
In the current New Zealand context, where pay equity has faced
recent setbacks and child poverty is a pressing
issue, it's critical that the legislation does not further
entrench inequalities. And this bill, as
it is drafted at the moment, does exactly that.
So I respectfully put forward that I think the pro rata
approach to sick leave should be rethought.
And I know people really like this idea of equality,
equality, but it's very formal equality, and also that the committee
should consider the idea of introducing a dedicated sick
leave to ensure more equitable outcome.
Thank you for your time, and I welcome any questions.
Thank you very much. Members, we've got time for a couple of quick questions if
anyone likes to ask a question.
I don't have a question, Annick, but that's a really helpful
perspective. Thank you. And not one we've had from other submitters yet,
so I really value that.
Thank you very much for taking time to submit to us.
We'll move on to our next submission.
I'd like to invite George McGuinness to the virtual table,
please.
Hi, everyone. Thank you for-
Morning, George. We've got five minutes with you this morning, including any time
for questions. Over to you.
Cool. Sweet. Hi, thank you for giving me the opportunity of having an
oral submission this morning. I'm a year 13 student in Auckland, and
based on my experiences with my own family, I researched and wrote a
report for school on the relationship between physically active work and
health outcomes in New Zealand. From that research background and my
interest in law and policy, that's why I decided to submit for this bill.
While I appreciate the work that this bill does, I have two main
concerns for workers in physically active jobs.
My first and main concern is the blanket accrual rate.
The bill applies at 0.0385 hours of sick leave per
standard hour worked uniformly across every industry.
This seems fair, but the idea that a construction worker doing grueling physical
work rain or shine, having the same minimum sick leave entitlement as a worker
sitting at a cushy desk is kind of disconnected from reality.
And the evidence supports this. A 2021 peer-reviewed study published
following over 3,500 workers found that those in the highest physical workload
quartile took 2.1 times more sick leave days than those in the
lowest
physical workload quartile. And that's even after
adjusting for age, gender, and lifestyle.
I posit that the bill should be amended to have a tiered sick leave accrual rate.
This can be administered proportionate to preexisting ACC levy
rate groups to prevent any more hoops from being introduced as this bill aims.
And despite the 2.1 times evidence, I propose that it should
be a very modest 50% rise as an evidence-based starting
point for officials to refine.
One limitation that I acknowledge with this suggestion is that the
classifications are by industry rather than individual role.
But this creates smaller inconsistencies in the current framework that ignores
physically demanding work entirely.
My second concern is the LCP framework.
We've already heard from lots of the earlier panelists today about how the
LCP framework creates issues with workers getting sick leave, so I won't repeat
that. But I think it's worth taking their analysis to emphasize the severe
impact on workers in physically demanding jobs, who are often the ones
who go beyond their contracted hours because their work is dictated by the job.
For example, a builder staying longer because the roof needs to be built
before the rain comes in, or a farmer working between their
hours that they can get their crop sowed.
So for workers in these physically demanding roles, the LCP
mechanism creates a dangerous incentive that is detrimental not only to the
workers, but ultimately costs employers more than it saves
them.Because a worker who is continually incentivized to push
through exhaustion and illness to collect LCP, operating like
dangerous machinery or carrying heavy loads, is an ACC claim waiting to
happen. This worker on ACC for months or even years
loses significant productivity, cost replacement, hiring and training,
and a WorkSafe investigation. I feel like this vastly exceeds
the cost that the worker taking more piecemeal sick leave throughout the year.
Therefore, for workers in WorkSafe classified priority industries or those
on the highest ACC employer levies, I think that the LCP payment should be removed
entirely and replaced with leave accrual on all hours worked.
This change also means that industries like healthcare, public sector,
hospitality, retail, and tourism, who largely drove the Holidays Act reform,
get to keep all the bill's LCP framework, as it doesn't have the same
risks to their worker safety. But finally, even if you don't think
anything I say stands today, at the very least, I believe that an
independent occupational health impact assessment should be commissioned
within two years of commencement,
with disaggregated analysis of impacts on Māori and Pasifika
workers, given their over-representation in physically active worker
groups, and thus their health is exceptionally vulnerable in this
bill.
I think that ultimately today, the bill's simplification of employment law
is great, but over-simplifying risks missing the nuance of how employment is
fundamentally different for people in physically active versus sedentary roles.
Thank you. I'm happy to answer any questions, but I know we're quite short on time
today.
Thanks very much, and really impressive
to see the submission. I've got a question just around the point you make around
the sick leave, particularly the challenge that can create for Māori
and Pasifika. Given that the LCP rate essentially
assumes they're going to take all of their sick leave, so it pays them out all of
their sick leave, and that the casual work is probably
something that is more widely used in some of the roles that you're
talking about, wouldn't this therefore be a benefit to those
groups because they're actually getting all of that sick leave pay
right up front?
I think that ultimately it's better that
workers receive their
sick leave entitlement rather than receiving LCP frameworks from
hours they work over. And this is because,
for
example, in these physically demanding work roles, like for example,
a construction worker,
when they're
working
past their contracted hours, for example, it's not like a
desk worker like yourself, having to sit at a desk for extra two hours.
They're laboring, carrying,
causing strain on themself, causing strain on their cardiovascular
system. And so ultimately,
while they're
accruing these extra LCP payments, ultimately they're
also requiring more rest and recovery after
doing all that extra work. And so as soon as they go past their
allocated sick leave entitlement that they accrue from the
hours that they contracted,
ultimately they
can't
afford to have unpaid leave. And so they will end up
coming to work physically tired and physically drained.
And I feel like ultimately that is more of a risk,
this incentive to work extra hours instead of taking rest and taking
time to recover is a dangerous incentive to have for
workers.
Got it. Very quick, we are over time, but very quick final question from Grant
McCallum.
Yeah. As a farmer who earns a living doing physical job,
unlike possibly some of my colleagues
I know.
Yeah. Thanks, George. Really impressed. I really enjoyed your submission.
But I just think, so the stats actually show
that people doing physical work have a greater use of sick leave.
Is that what your research showed you?
Yeah. From the peer-reviewed study I got from the International Archives of
Occupation Environmental Health-
Mm
... it showed that workers in physically demanding roles take
2.1 times more sick leave than those in less
demanding roles.
Well, I can assure you I certainly didn't, but anyway, thanks.
I appreciate that, mate. Cheers. Bye.
All right. Thanks very much, George.
Appreciate you taking the time to join us today. Really impressive to see you.
Members, we're moving on to Frank Owen Pirie
for a five-minute submission. Thanks, Frank, for joining us this morning,
including any time for questions. Over to you.
Just give Frank a chance to unmute and turn on his video.
Can't hear you yet, Frank.
Great. There we go. Frank, we can see you, and I think we can hear you.
Do speak for us.
No, we can't hear you.
We can see you, though.
If you're struggling, we can see if we can move to our next
submitter, and come back to you at the end
if you're able to solve itOkay. So, is there
any chance that Retail New Zealand, Carolyn,
that you're online? I'm sure you're here and prepped and ready, so
hopefully I can call on you early.
Oh, look at that.
Fantastic.
It's the thing about retail, you've got to be there when the customer's ready to
come in the door, eh?
Absolutely. Look, thank you very much for
bringing us in. And just
for those of you I haven't met, I'm Carolyn Young, Chief Executive of Retail NZ,
and my colleague-
I'm Denise, Advocacy Manager at Retail NZ
... and my other colleague, Eve Cameron.
Business and HR Advisor at Retail NZ.
Great. So look, we take our
submission this week, we just wanted to highlight a few key points that
really are critical from a retail perspective.
So look, Retail NZ members support the introduction of a leave
compensation payment framework for additional hours
worked by non-casual employees,
and this provides a much simpler and more transparent
alternative to current navigating rules under the Holidays Act.
There are concerns about the LCP rate, though, of
12.5% being too high.
We understand that the intention of the LCP is to take into account the
absence of both annual and sick leave for casual workers.
However, permanent employees
would be entitled to receive the same LCP rate for additional hours worked, and
our members have questioned how that calculation has been
put in place at 12.5% when they already have a sick
leave entitlement and annual leave entitlements.
So we recognize that the LCP is intended to simplify leave
payments and the calculations under the Holidays Act, but the
biggest impact of the new LCP payment will be for
those businesses that are small regional or have large
part-time workforces.
In retail environments, their
staff regularly work additional hours, where reliance on flexibility is often
necessary to manage seasonal demand, business continuity, and
unplanned absences from some employers, will incur
additional wage costs regardless of thorough workforce planning
practices. As you said at the start,
when you're in retail, you've got to open the store, and so you've got to have
people that are available, and if people call in sick, you have to often call in
casual people or part-timers and at short notice.
So it's an environment that employs significant number of part-time workers.
We're open seven days a week, often businesses are open late as well,
so 9:00 to 5:00 doesn't cut it in retail.
So,
many of these
workers value part-time work and take on additional hours that are mutually
agreed.
So,
flexibility we believe is important.
Increasing the rate from 8% to 12.5%
represents a material and immediate labor cost increase, particularly
for retailers.
We support the introduction of a clearer based approach to
determining otherwise working days for employees where
variable schedules occur regularly.
Members have welcomed greater certainty compared to the subjective and often
contested tests under the current act, and we strongly support removing the
requirement to pay public holidays that fall after an employee's
last day of work. And then,
the parental leave is the other one I'll just quickly touch
on. Employees returning from parental leave, it's an
important way in which we need to transition people back into
the workforce. But having access to
parental, to having access to annual leave and sick leave at
full rates, does put a burden on the
employer, where you've had an employee who hasn't contributed to the
business for 12 months, and all of a sudden they've got all of
their annual leave that's accumulated over their
parental leave is available at their full rate, which is a significant
change. And then probably
one other small thing I would say would be,
just some of our businesses that are franchise businesses
and businesses change hands on a semi-regular basis, just
clarifying how those changes are implemented
when a business changes hands, and thinking a little bit about a
change of ownership and
how that impacts
anniversary dates for
an employment contract. So they'd probably be the things that we'd highlight, and
we're really open for questions.
Thanks very much, Carolyn. Members, questions for Retail New
Zealand?
No, very helpful. Thank you.
Just a question around your comment around the
12.5%, and particularly the inclusion of sick leave as part
of that calculation.
Do you perceive that your members would be more
comfortable having that at a lower rate, but
then managing sick leave for those casuals outside of that
rate into the future? The whole idea was to simplify
leave payments, but what I'm hearing is that that might not be what your
members would desire.
Yeah, I think really we were looking at,
you can correct me if I'm wrong, it was really more about those permanent workers
where they work additional hours and how that calculation moves from 8% to
12.5%. We understand in terms of the casual, that
how they've worked through the 12.5% where we can live with
that, but actually it's the permanent employees where they work additional hours.
Because it often happens in retail where you've
got additional shifts or there's different hours, people under mutual agreement
will work additional hours, then all of a sudden the rate that they are
accumulating, it goes up to 12.5%.
That was the key thing, wasn't it?
So I suppose the-
That was our big concern.
Yeah.
And it's understood that that additional
work doesn't contribute to what would've been
the average
payout they receive on a sick leave day.
So that additional work would no longer
contribute to their sick leave calculation
on a sick leave day.
Yes, but it would be preferred that the rate for a permanent employee was remained
at 8%.
Okay.
Okay, any other questions?
No.
Thanks so much. Really appreciate you presenting to our committee
again, and I'm sure we'll see you in the not too distant future.
Perfect. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Members, we've got one submitter that we're trying
to get in touch with, so we will move to...
We've got a little bit of a buffer, actually, unless,
Clark, we have any of our post-10:00
a.m. submitters ready.
Morning, Mr. Chair. Christie from Hospitality New Zealand is on the call.
We'll just need to see whether her general counsel
is also available, but we can promote Christie to find out.
Okay, let's do that.
Hi, Christie. So are both of you in the same room there?
Yes, we are. Good morning.
Good morning.
Fabulous. You might just want to change that setting so that it doesn't have that
blur on the back, because otherwise-
Yes. I see
... you're going to keep going in and out of focus.
How does that look?
Fabulous. Great. So we've got you for 10 minutes this morning,
including any time for questions. So I'll hand over to you.
Perfect. Well, good morning. Thank you for having us in and
allowing us to speak to our submission.
Broadly, we support many of the recommendations.
We think there's a bit of a balance in here in terms of
gains for both employers and employees, and
recognize that that's always a really fine line to be walking.
So, thank you for giving us the opportunity to comment
through here.
Particularly, pro rata of sick leave, that's something that our members
have been calling for for a number of years, and
in an industry where sometimes people only work two shifts a week, to
have them eligible for five weeks of sick leave doesn't
always sit well with their more full-time
colleagues. So
commend you on that one.
We do have some questions around the standard hours,
and particularly
in terms of employees picking up extra work
voluntarily,
coming in to work an extra shift if one of their colleagues is unable to,
or in terms of very
seasonal workplaces where they potentially work more hours
in summer and less in winter, and have a balance throughout the year to
reach their standard
hours.
In my mind,
a work pattern makes more sense. We obviously have guaranteed
minimum hours within employment contracts.
However,
depending on seasonality, functions,
what's happening within venues, standard hours might actually be higher than
that.
And then
I know there's a lot of questions around casual employees and their
entitlement to sick leave. However,
from our point of view, there's probably a bigger question of what
actually constitutes a casual employee, and
what is the nature of that working relationship.
Because if they're a true casual employee,
we are of the belief that
each time they finish a shift, that is the end of
that contract until they are offered and
accepted a new shift. So therefore, where does sick
leave actually become an entitlement there?
And also would like some clarification around the multiple
roles and keeping leave entitlements separate.
Again, particularly in regional small businesses, it's not
unusual for one of your
front of house or kitchen staff potentially might be working part-time and
studying. On a school holiday, the cleaner's away for a week
and they would like to pick up that cleaning shift,
because they have the capability and the time.
What does that then mean for that leave entitlement, and how do we keep that
separate?
So I think that's
sort of the broader points of our submission, and happy to take questions and
go into any details. I have my general counsel here who's happy to go
into the nitty-gritty for you.
Thanks so much. I just want to ask a question about the point you make around
that a casual contract ends at the end of
each,
essentially, engagement. Just wonder, give us a little bit more of a sense of your
view on that and how it impacts leave entitlements from your perspective.
Yeah, absolutely. And I guess it's also looking at what's in
employment legislation versus employment law.
So-
Yeah
... Tim, would you like to speak to it?
Yeah, sure. So,
the definition of casual employment, and something that you see in a lot of casual
employment agreements, is that they say that the employment's not
continuous, that the employment relationship
ends at the end of each period of engagement, which would
typically be a shift, but sometimes it's longer than a shiftBut it's the
block of work that the employee has said, "Yes, I will come
in this week and work today," or, "today and tomorrow," or whatever it
is. And
that's been accepted as the way casual works by
the ERA and the Employment Court. And so therefore,
automatically you are not within
Section 63 (1) of the Holidays Act, which
says that
employment needs to be continuous for six months as your first limb of
when you become entitled to sick leave.
Also,
in the other limb of Section 63 of the Holidays Act, of when
an employee can become entitled to two sick leave, is
when they have worked an average of 10 hours a week
over six months,
and
not less than one hour every week, or not less than
40 hours every month. So you've got to satisfy
the first criteria and then one out of two of the second criteria,
and if you do meet that test, then the employment is
looking pretty regular. You're probably not a true casual.
So in my experience, true casuals are generally not
legally entitled to sick leave.
And
the real confusion, though, is when they are a true casual and when
they aren't, because there are a lot of workers on casual employment agreements,
but when the ERA looks at the work pattern, they
say, "No, no, this is not true casual." And that's a bigger
problem for us than confusion around who is a employee and
who is a contractor.
And that problem around who's an employee and who's a contractor has been
helpfully dealt with by the gateway test in the amendments to
the Employment Relations Act. We think a gateway test for saying
who is a true casual and who's not a true casual would
solve a lot of confusion.
Okay. Thank you.
Grant.
Yeah. I just want you to pick up on that point you made about if
you've got someone who's working for you in the hospitality game,
and I'm
thinking of particular businesses in the Bay of Islands, my way,
who they're really busy in summer, and they've got someone permanently employed for
12 months, and do a lot more hours there and a lot less in the
winter period, which is quite normal.
And we had the dairy sector come in and talk about having annualized
hours,
and
sort of averaged out over the year and they've got an arrangement.
Is that the kind of sort of thing you're looking for?
I'd be interested in this, please.
I'm really
keen to keep things simple.
Yeah.
And recognizing that annualized hours are sometimes not simple
to
work out if you're a little mom and dad business.
Gotcha.
But yes, when you're looking at those standard hours and you're
going over and above and then having that 12.5%
entitlement coming in-
Mm-hmm
... that doesn't necessarily correlate with what the actual annualized
hours would be. So if we can find a simple way to make that
happen, or even doing it quarterly-
Mm-hmm
... depending, or
sorry, I should say biannually, depending on the seasonal nature.
But Tim, have you got anything?
Yeah. Can I jump in with a comment on that?
Because-
Yeah
... Clause 6 definition of standard hours, I know 6 (2)
refers to rostered hours, but the default under 6 (1) seems
to be
what really is the equivalent of minimum guaranteed hours in the employment
agreement. But often minimum guaranteed hours, they're the
employer saying, "Well, in a bad week, what's the minimum we can be
sure we can offer you?" And for the employee's point of view,
"When you're busy with university exams or with kids' school holidays,
what's the minimum number of hours you can commit to us?" So you might have a
worker that has a minimum guaranteed hours of, say, 10 a week, but typically
works 20 or 25.
And so
the standard hours aren't really giving you
a good ref- the standard hours as defined in the bill
aren't really giving you a good reflection of what their typical working
week looks like. And
I would've thought that you want the annual leave to
be accruing based on what a typical week looks like,
so that when it comes time for them to take three or four weeks annual leave, they
can get paid based on what a typical week looks like.
Yeah. Very helpful.
Thank you. Teanau.
Yeah.
Kia ora. I was listening to your comments around true casual and
not true casual. And I was wanting to
know
how you sort that out now, and how you might foresee the
bill
helping you or hindering you in your perspective on that
aspect.
So I think it would
be a way of working out some criteria in the
same way that we've done with contractors.
And the criteria, I suppose, would start off by saying it was a true casual,
saying that there was no obligation to
offer shifts,
and no obligation to accept shifts.
And
I suppose the question, though, the more difficult question, would there be any
criteria around regularity? I think that would be quite hard to draft.
Again, there would be a criteria of opportunity to get professional advice before
accepting the agreement.
Perhaps
some sort of recognition that-
A statement of the reason as to why it was casual, perhaps like you see as
required with fixed term employment agreements.
There's an obligation to state a good bona fide
reason why it's casual, could be a criteria.
Part of the way it's handled at the moment as well is we encourage our members to
actually regularly review work patterns and contracts.
So if someone is regularly on shift and that looks like
it's going to continue, we do recommend that they move from a casual to a permanent
part-time employment agreement.
Thank you
very much. I think that that's all we've got time for this morning.
Really appreciate the time you've taken to present to us, and for those new
insights. Members, we're now moving back to the submission from Frank
Owen Pirie. He's joining us via teleconference.
Frank, we've got five minutes with you this morning, including time for questions.
Fire away.
Hello?
Yep, we can hear you.
Hey, good morning. My name is Frank, and
I recently graduated from university.
I'm currently working as a chef while looking for work in design.
Although my contract says part-time, I work full-time hours.
I've worked in hospitality since I was 16, and in all of those
years, I've never seen a contract that actually reflects the hours people work.
Most say 10 or 15 hours a week, but the reality is closer to 40.
That's just how the industry operates.
So when this bill says leave should be based on contracted hours, not
actual hours worked, that does not reflect reality.
It ignores a huge part of the workforce and how the workforce
actually works and lives.
This isn't just my experience. Around 20% of workers are on
part-time contracts, and about a quarter of work happens outside standard
hours.
That means this bill affects a massive proportion of the workforce,
especially people in hospitality, retail, and care.
These are already lower paid roles, often filled by younger
people, older workers, and caregivers, people who
already have less security. Under this bill, someone can work
full-time hours every week, but only
build leave as if they're part-time.
So the more flexible and available you are, the less protected you become.
That is backwards.
In industries like hospitality and healthcare, where extra hours are normal,
this will mean less sick leave and fewer protections for people who are already
stretched.
And when people don't have enough sick leave, they still come to work.
That's the reality. In my job, if I'm sick, I do not have leave.
There is
pressure to show up anyway, especially when places are short-staffed.
But in hospitality and healthcare, that doesn't just affect the worker, it affects
everyone. We've already seen what happens when illness spreads through workplaces.
This bill increases that risk.
Paid leave isn't just a benefit, it is a health and safety
protection.
This bill shifts it
into something closer to a trade-off.
It creates a two-tier system,
where people with stable hours keep their leave, but
people with terrible hours, often the lowest paid, get actual less
protection. That's not balance, that is inequity.
There is also real risk this encourages employers to keep contracts
artificially low and rely on extra hours because it reduces their
obligation to provide leave.
So instead of protecting workers, it creates incentives to structure work in a way
that gives them less.
I also want to point out
something concerning an interview on Radio NZ.
Minister Brooke van Velden has said she originally aimed for a version of the bill
where no worker would be worse off, but that approach was abandoned after being
deemed too complex for payroll systems to handle.
So we are left with a bill where a large portion of workers will be worse
off, and those workers are already among the most vulnerable.
And for what? Just to make payroll simpler?
Even though we are living in 2026 with modern payroll systems
widely available, that is not a strong enough reason to reduce people's
rights.
Simplifying admin shouldn't come at the
cost of fairness. At its core, this bill
shifts risk from employers to workers,
especially those with the least power to absorb it.
To fix this, I recommend leave should reflect actual
hours worked, not just contracted hours.
All hours should accrue leave proportionately rather than being replaced with
compensation.
There should be a minimum floor leave entitlement for all workers, and
there must be safeguards to stop standard hours from being set artificially
low to reduce entitlement.
A leave system should provide certainty, fairness, and protection.
Right now, this bill risks doing the opposite.
It creates a system where the people working the hardest, most irregular hours,
receive the least protection.
A system that lets people work full-time but be treated like
part-time isn't flexibility, it is exploitation with better paperwork.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Are there any questions from members?
No questions. Thanks very much, Frank.
I appreciate the time you've taken to present to us.
Thank you.
And we are now going to invite our final
submitter,
because I think the one individual has not been able to come back to us.
So Oceana Gold, are they ready for us,
Clark?
Hello.
Good morning.
Thanks for joining us. We've got 10 minutes with you this morning, including time
for questions, so over to you.
Thank you.
I'm Alison Paul, and I am the Senior Vice
President for Legal and Public Affairs for OceanaGold.
And I'm Diana Halloran. I'm the People and Culture Manager for OceanaGold New
Zealand.
So very quickly, a bit about OceanaGold.
We are New Zealand's largest gold miner, and we operate two gold mines at
the moment, one at Waihi and one down north of Dunedin at
Macraes. So we employ about 1,200
employees across those two operations.
Our wages are about 180 million every year.
About half of our workforce is unionized, mainly in the
operating areas.
And we run, at the moment, 210 different
rosters. 210. So that's on an operation that runs
for 365 days of the year, 24
hours a day, regardless of whether it's a public holiday
and anything else. We just run continuously at both
sites.
Those rosters cover an absolute multitude of
patterns. So in some instances, we have people working on a
Thursday through to Wednesday roster, for example.
Night shift, day shift, all the permutations you could think
of. And so what that results in is a large
amount of complexity, and when people talk about
ambiguity between the different
pay calculation methods, so at the moment, you're talking about
ordinary weekly pay, average daily pay, average weekly
earnings, relevant daily pay, and you're applying
that across hundreds of roster patterns and
different types of holiday, you just get this
incredible complexity. So the term
ambiguity in any given instance sounds as though
it's a nice binary choice and you can err on the side of caution,
make sure you are paying people at least enough,
err on the side of caution and move on.
But the reality is, if we give an example of the recent
Anzac Day holiday,
that may have involved, in
some instances, employees who had worked overtime.
They were doing a Thursday to Wednesday roster, so they
incorporated both the actual holiday on the Saturday
and the Mondayized holiday on the Monday.
That was something, we use SAP, that was something that
SAP, across about 800 employees,
was unable to calculate. So
suddenly, you are introducing manual processes
regularly, highly manual processes for
applying these different permutations of holiday.
So,
when you apply that complexity across 210 different rosters,
if you were to ask me,
how do you err on the side of caution?
We have to err on the side of caution by actually being incredibly
manual in our checks and balances.
It is very complicated, unnecessarily
complicated,
and our number one submission
really is that these changes in the bill that we're looking at today
can't come soon enough. We need to find a way to make this
far, far simpler.
So the essence of our submission
is around the two-year lead-in period.
We think that we understand some of the reasoning behind it.
We understand that there will be very big businesses like ourselves that need
to reconfigure their systems. For some
businesses or government departments, it may be a choice to
take a couple of years to do that. For us,
we will be embracing the change just as quickly as we can to make our life and
the life of our employees simpler and make it a whole lot easier for
any given employee to know what they're going to be paid during a period of leave.
There will be small employers for whom simply going to a new
system needs some time.
They will be running less complicated lives than we do in roster
patterns. So I can see scope for two years lead in
for some employers. It's not going to work for us,
and we would like to be able to move to this
simpler way of calculating holiday pay and
the other forms of pay far, far sooner than two years'
time.
So, that is the essence of our submission.
And
the rest of the submission follows along the same lines.
There is no ability to contract out or conduct
remediation processes or do any of the other things that could
allow you to have a simpler life within less than this two-year
lead-in period, and we would like to see that changed.
Happy to take questions.
Thanks very much. Grant McCullagh.
Yeah.
So I'm just intrigued by your comments.
So what you're effectively saying, under the current law, that
there isn't a payroll system out there that can actually cope with the
current complexities. Is that what you're saying to me?
Absolutely, 100%.
And you anticipate that will be
different with the new law?
Yes, we do. The new law, quite frankly, is far simpler,
and it looks at what someone has contracted to be paid on a day off.
Okay.
Thank you.
Thank you. Appreciate that. Thank you.
Diana Turiona.
Yeah, thank you for the submission.
One of the things that we've heard from a number of submitters is around the issues
around software.
So, I'm interested, just following up what Grant was saying.
So you're saying you've got some software that'll click in pretty quickly
to sort all this stuff out?
Well, we use SAP Concur and SAP.
So it's
one of the big well-known,
well-regarded international payroll systems.
Dee, you might be able to talk about whether there's any other systems that
are more localized, but to our knowledge, there is no system that can
cope with the degree of complexity that is introduced
by
five different basic calculation approaches
to all of the different leave types across 210
different rosters.
Yeah. Just simplification of the bill in its entirety would
make it easier for the software providers to be able to develop
a product. And that might be the timing that needs the lead in for the change.
But I would anticipate that any simplification of the bill would be able to
add to the employee's experience, the user experience, as well as organizational
experience.
And we're not saying that we want something off the peg.
So we configure our payroll system in
conjunction with SAP and in
conjunction with accounting and legal advice and other things so that we are making
sure we're making the right payments.
So you don't just plug and play, but the configuring
of the system
tells us that we have to manualize large parts of our
process every time you get into, for this
example I gave you around Anzac Day, something that the system
can't be configured in advance to handle.
Got it.
Any other questions?
Thank you, members.
Thank you for the submission,
Alison. We really appreciate it, and I'm sure we'll see you again.
And members, that concludes our subcommittee
hearings. We'll join for the main committee a little bit later
this morning